It's no coincidence that network computers, the Internet and Java have emerged simultaneously as trends in computing - all are "open" technologies that have democratized and universalized the sharing of information. Because it can run on any platform, the 100 per cent Pure Java environment promises to liberate MIS managers from relying on specific, proprietary technologies, including those from the Microsoft and Intel world - software programs no longer need to be written for a specific server or client.
According to a report from Redwood City, CA-based Zona Research, Java: Markets, Opportunities and Trends, 97 per cent of corporations will be using Java for server-based applications within the next two years. In fact, Java has been the fastest growing language/technology in the history of the computer industry.
Network computers free users from using specific desktop devices to access corporate information, PC-style applications and the Internet. Since the storage and processing of data is done at the server level, the expense and complexity of operating systems and microprocessors in network clients becomes more manageable - and less of an issue. Employees don't need to troubleshoot PC problems themselves and MIS managers can more easily manage the network.
The Internet is a kind of glue that connects servers and NCs - it's useful as a communications medium and as a way to distribute Java applets. Like Java and NCs, the Internet is universal - it can be accessed from any platform.
Although NCs can access personal productivity applications from a Windows server, Java software will give many former "greenscreen" users another way to perform functions previously limited to those with PCs - calendaring, word processing, spreadsheets, browsers, groupware and more - without having to take on the overhead of managing a PC. And this new style of server-delivered applications can be used by everyone in the organization, on any system - existing PCs, workstations or NCs.
With Java, IT departments can distribute software programs that can run on any system, from the largest enterprise server to the smallest PC server. And Java allows us to deliver new applications across a diverse range of clients, including PCs, NCs, mobile PCs, mobile NCs, PDAs and digital telephones. Programmers can break up "fat client" software applications into smaller pieces and store them on a central server. The NC user taps only the portions of a program needed to perform a Function, while other software functions reside on the server.
When it comes to personal productivity programs, approximately 80 per cent of workers use only 20 per cent of a word processing application. But a Java word processing application divides the functions in a way that makes the most sense - simple typing, highlighting paragraphs or outlining words in bold can be performed at the NC level, while spell-checking can be done at the server level where dictionaries and large databases are stored.
Because all application-specific codes are stored and managed on centralized servers, Java can help reduce development costs, increase a company's return on IT investment and extend the reach of existing products. Other cost savings come in the form of reduced maintenance and fewer software and hardware compatibility problems.
The beauty of NCs is that they allow users to access all kinds of information, such as data residing on the Internet and corporate intranets. Many companies planning to reduce their paper environment and distribute information more quickly and pervasively can now store corporate documents and databases on an intranet. A company's return on investment increases dramatically as its intranet performs more functions and provides more information to users, according to Zona Research - dynamic access to corporate databases leads to an average return on investment of 64 per cent. Users no longer need a complex operating system on their desktops to access a few simple applications and the Internet.